JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
Gwen Ifill is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: a
chilling attack
at Turkey's busiest airport. At
least 41 are
dead and hundreds wounded, the
latest in a
wave of violence to hit a
country active in
the anti-ISIS coalition.
Also ahead this Wednesday, I sit
down with
CIA Director John Brennan to
talk repercussions
of the Istanbul bombing, the
ISIS threat,
and the Benghazi report.
Plus, hope behind bars, how
convicted juveniles
in Massachusetts are planning
for a brighter
future by earning their degree
while serving
time.
JOSH, Resident: I have two
younger brothers,
so they look up to me. I have
people that
see a lot in me, and I don't
want to really
let them down, or myself down.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
""PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Investigators in
Istanbul,
Turkey, have spent this day
trying to reconstruct
the assault that turned Ataturk
Airport into
a killing field.
Three suicide bombers left
widespread carnage,
42 dead, more than 230 wounded,
but no claim
of responsibility.
Special correspondent Jane
Ferguson begins
our coverage from Istanbul.
JANE FERGUSON: Operations
resumed at Europe's
third busiest airport, amid the
stark signs
of terror, glass panels riddled
with bullet
holes, and blood splattered on
ceilings.
The attack began last night,
shortly before
10:00 p.m. local time. Security
cameras captured
one attacker just after being
shot by police,
and then setting off his bomb.
That touched
off a stampede to get outside,
and away from
danger.
MAN: One guy had holes in his
back from shrapnel
or from glass.
HACER PEKSEN, Witness (through
translator):
People were wounded. People fell
down in front
of me. Four people fell in front
of me. They
were torn into pieces.
JANE FERGUSON: In the hours
after the attack,
Turkish officials pointed to the
Islamic State.
The group was blamed for a
suicide bombing
in January that killed several
tourists near
the famed Blue Mosque in
Istanbul.
And today marked two years since
ISIS declared
its so-called caliphate in Syria
and Iraq.
Moreover, Turkey backs the U.S.
bombing campaign
against ISIS in Syria, and on
Monday, the
Turks moved to improve relations
with Russia,
which carries out its own
airstrikes in Syria.
Both Russian President Putin and
President
Obama called Turkey's President
Recep Tayyip
Erdogan today to offer
condolences. Back in
Istanbul, the human toll of this
latest attack
is still being felt by relatives
and friends
of the wounded.
MAN (through translator): We are
waiting for
some kind of solution. We can
hear that people
are wailing here. We cannot cope
anymore.
We can't stand still.
JANE FERGUSON: The Turkish
government has
worked for years to build an
international
airline and to make Istanbul
Airport one of
the biggest hubs in the world.
Any attack
against this airport is an
attack against
the economic ambitions of the
Turkish government.
They know that.
And so just a day after the
attack, the airport
is completely reopened and it's
business as
usual. Some travelers at Ataturk
today were
trying to do the same. They say
the risk of
attacks at major airports is now
a reality
they have come to terms with.
WOMAN: I think the best option
is to just
go on and try not to be so
nervous, and, of
course be cautious, but to live
your live
as it was before.
JANE FERGUSON: In the end,
Tuesday's bombings
are yet another reminder that
international
travel remains a major target
for terror attacks.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Jane
Ferguson
in Istanbul, Turkey.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will take a
closer look
at the situation in Turkey after
the news
summary.
Meanwhile, the shockwaves from
Istanbul also
reverberated in the U.S.
presidential campaign.
At a rally last night,
Republican Donald Trump
warned of dangers at home and
abroad. He said
-- quote -- "We better get
tough, or we're
not going to have much of a
country left."
And in a statement, Democrat
Hillary Clinton
called the attack -- quote -- "a
reminder
that the United States cannot
retreat."
President Obama and the leaders
of Mexico
and Canada defended free trade
today at a
North American summit. Their
comments were
partly in response to Donald
Trump's threats
to quit the North American and
Pacific trade
deals. Mr. Obama met in Ottawa
with Canadian
Prime Minister Trudeau and
Mexican President
Pena Nieto. He said cutting off
trade will
only make everyone poorer.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
The prescription of withdrawing
from trade
deals and focusing solely your
local market,
that's the wrong medicine. We
can't disengage.
We have got to engage more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The leaders also
called for
more liberal immigration
policies and action
against climate change.
European Union leaders issued a
warning today.
If Britain wants continued
access to the euro
market, it must accept European
workers. Member
states met in Brussels just days
after Britain
voted to quit the E.U.
French President Francois
Hollande summed
up the message to leaders in
London.
FRANCOIS HOLLANDE, French
President (through
translator): They have to
understand that
they can't just hang on to their
existing
advantages. You can't just say
what is ours
is ours, and what is yours is up
for negotiations.
It's an old principle, but, no,
it doesn't
work like that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Part of what
drove the Brexit
vote was opposition to accepting
thousands
of workers from other E.U.
states.
The U.S. Senate moved today to
give final
approval to a financial rescue
package for
Puerto Rico. It cleared a key
procedural hurdle
with votes to spare. The bill
already passed
the House. It would let the
island restructure
$70 billion in debt, and it
would set up an
oversight board. Puerto Rico
faces a $2 billion
debt payment on Friday.
Toyota has announced two major
recalls affecting
almost 3.4 million vehicles
worldwide. About
half-a-million of those are in
North America.
The recalls involve faulty air
bags and fuel
emissions controls. The
automaker says there
have been no reports of injuries
or fatalities
related to the problems.
And Wall Street made up more of
its losses
from the Brexit sell-off. The
Dow Jones industrial
average gained back nearly 285
points to close
at 17694. The Nasdaq rose 87
points, and the
S&P 500 added 34.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the CIA director
talks global security after the
Istanbul attacks;
overcoming barriers to educate
incarcerated
teens; a spacecraft's five-year
journey to
Jupiter, and much more.
We return now to the terror
attacks in Turkey
with "NewsHour" special
correspondent Jane
Ferguson, who is in Istanbul,
and Amberin
Zaman. She's a journalist and a
public policy
scholar at the Wilson Center
here in Washington.
And we welcome both of you to
the program.
Jane, to you first. I know you
have been reporting
on this all day. What have you
learned about
where exactly these attacks at
the airport
took place?
JANE FERGUSON: Well, Judy, those
blasts took
place at the very entrance of
the airport,
basically at the door where you
would have
had people gathering in the
street, getting
out of taxies and trying to
enter into the
building.
Ironically, that's actually
where the security
screening is in Istanbul Airport
at Ataturk
here behind me. They always
screen bags of
everybody who is coming into the
airport.
As soon as you get in through
glass doors,
there is a screening area and
the bags have
to go through the machine to be
checked.
And that's been in place for
some time now.
However, that also leads up to a
buildup of
people, and people will be there
queuing to
get in, so, of course, that
makes it very
vulnerable to such an attack
right at the
entrance there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jane, you have
also been out
and around the city of Istanbul
today. What
are people saying? We know there
have been
a string of attacks in Turkey.
Do they view
this as just one more in what's
been going
on?
JANE FERGUSON: Speaking at a
people in a hospital
today in the city where people
are waiting
anxiously to hear about their
loved ones and
their friends, people were
saying that this
attack seems to hit home even
harder for them,
partly because it was at an
airport.
One person said to me today that
the airport
should be the most secure area
in the country,
that those are places that are
typically secure,
places where typically there is
a lot of police
and there is a lot of checks. So
people feel
extremely vulnerable, and
they're also pointing
out this attack was extremely
brazenly against
civilians. That's something
that's not lost
on people here. Of course, many
Turks killed
as well, as civilians in this
attack, and
so people are increasingly
feeling very vulnerable.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amberin Zaman,
you know Turkey
well. Officials say this has the
earmarks
of ISIS, but they don't know for
sure. Why
would ISIS want to make this
kind of an attack?
AMBERIN ZAMAN, Wilson Center:
Well, this isn't
the first time that ISIS has
attacked inside
Turkey.
This would be the seventh attack
so far, but
it's drawn a lot more attention,
precisely
as your correspondent was
saying, because
it's such a high-value target,
it's an international
airport. Last year, you had
around 40 million
people transit through Istanbul
Airport. Let's
not forget it's the holy month
of Ramadan
and that Turkey is a
predominantly Muslim
country, so, of course, that
sort of has a
multiplier effect in terms of
the horror and
indecency of it all.
But Turkey, you know, is an
active member
of the anti-ISIS coalition, and
since June
2015, it's allowed the anti-ISIS
coalition
led by the United States to fly
missions,
combat missions out of the
Incirlik Air Base
in Southern Turkey. Turkey
itself has stepped
up artillery attacks against
ISIS.
And since May, we think around
800 ISIS militants
may have been killed in those
attacks and
a lot of pressure inside Turkey
also against
ISIS, where, sadly, ISIS is very
well-organized.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, tell us
about that. I
mean, how much of a presence
does ISIS have
inside Turkey?
AMBERIN ZAMAN: Well, the
trajectory has been
quite sort of sinuous.
Initially, Turkey was not that
concerned,
or it certainly didn't seem to
be that concerned
by the ISIS threat. And, as you
know, this
term the jihadi highway was
being applied
to Turkey because they were so
lax about the
fighters that were going in and
out of Turkey.
And why? Because Turkey's stated
policy in
Syria is to overthrow the regime
of Bashar
Assad on the one hand and also
to combat Kurdish
separatists inside Northern
Syria.
And, of course, the conundrum is
that those
very same Kurdish separatists
are the United
States' top allies in the fight
against ISIS,
so it's a very complicated sort
of architecture
that we have there, but Turkey
has not only
used these rebel also against
Assad, but also
against the Kurds inside
Northern Syria, because
they regard them as a security
threat.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back to you,
Jane, there at
the airport. Are you already
seeing security
stepped up? What are you seeing
there?
JANE FERGUSON: Well, it's
interesting, Judy.
Being at the airport earlier on
today, things
were getting back to normal at a
remarkable
pace. Huge amounts of travelers
arriving and
leaving. Of course, the area
that had been
bombed has been cordoned off
now, and that
will need to face a very large
cleanup operation.
But now what we're seeing is a
little bit
of extra security. We're seeing
some extra
police, police who are heavily
armed. We're
seeing cars that aren't allowed
to stop in
front of the building for a long
period of
time and they just need to drop
off people
and move on quickly.
But we're not seeing anything
significantly
different, the usual security
measures that
I discussed earlier, where you
enter through
the glass doors and then you
have to have
your baggage checked. Those are
still going
on. That still seems to be the
security protocol
here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It is
complicated.
Amberin Zaman, thank you very
much. And Jane
Ferguson in Istanbul, thank you.
Now to my interview with
America's top spy,
the director of the Central
Intelligence Agency,
John Brennan.
I spoke with him this afternoon
at the Council
on Foreign Relations in
Washington.
Director John Brennan, thank you
very much
for talking with us.
JOHN BRENNAN, CIA Director:
Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, the
administration, you
and others have said that this
attack in Istanbul
has all the earmarks of an ISIS
attack. What
are the odds that they can pull
off something
like that in the United States?
JOHN BRENNAN: Well, I think it's
much more
difficult for them to carry out
something
like that in the United States.
First of all, Turkey is a lot
closer to their
core, to the Syria-Iraq theater.
And there
are a lot of steps that they
would have to
go through in order to be able
to carry out
something like that, where they
have deployed
fighters, whether or not these
are individuals
who came from inside Syria or
Iraq, but they
are close to that area.
And we have the benefit of an
ocean between
us, as well as some very, very
comprehensive
efforts that have been
undertaken since 9/11
to help protect this homeland.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Does the fact,
though, that
they continue to be able to pull
off these
kinds of attacks give you any
better understanding
of what is lacking in either the
U.S. approach
or the approach of U.S. allies
in fighting
ISIS?
JOHN BRENNAN: It gives me better
insight into
their determination to continue
to kill as
many innocent men, women and
children as possible.
And it also, I think,
demonstrates that we
really have to be on our guard
against all
different types of attacks,
particularly since
individuals who try to carry out
these attacks
are suicide bombers and
shooters. That makes
it very difficult for law
enforcement security
agencies to be able to stop them
from carrying
them out.
I don't think we're ever going
to have a situation
where we are immune from this
type of violence.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Of course, the
core of what's
behind so much of ISIS activity
has to do
with the war in Syria, the civil
war going
on there that's brought in so
many different
elements.
Secretary of State John Kerry
said yesterday
that Iran had been helpful in
the fight against
ISIS. Is that how you see Iran's
role there?
JOHN BRENNAN: Well, I think the
Iranians have
a vested interest in doing what
they can to
prevent the growth of ISIS in
that area, because
ISIS has a very strong anti-Shia
dimension
to it, so there are some things
that the Iranians
can do and even some things that
the Iranians
have done that have helped to
inhibit the
further growth of ISIS.
But there are a lot of things
that Iran does
that tends to facilitate
terrorism, and they
still are the leading state
sponsor of terrorism
in the world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, on balance,
would you say
Iran is more helpful in the
fight against
terrorism or less?
JOHN BRENNAN: On balance, I
think they have
to do more. I think they have
done some things,
but they need to demonstrate
their commitment
to helping defeat these
terrorist organizations
and being able to work with
regional states,
their neighbors and doing it in
a way that
is really going to be designed
to destroy
these organizations.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The attack in
Orlando by the
young man who said he was
inspired or was
-- pledged allegiance to ISIS,
there is no
direct connection that's been
shown yet to
ISIS. Is this the new normal for
seeing what
we call these lone wolf attacks
in the United
States?
JOHN BRENNAN: Well, it's
certainly one of
the more worrisome features of
this phenomenon
of ISIS, which has been able to
use the Internet
and to exhort and incite
individuals to carry
out attacks in its name.
So there needn't be a direct
connection. And,
unfortunately, as we saw in
Orlando, individuals
can take it upon themselves and
with the availability
to weapons or access to
material, they can
carry out these attacks. This is
something
that not just the FBI and
intelligence agencies
are challenged with. It's also
the local police
communities.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And is there --
is intelligence
up to this challenge, or are we
in a whole
new frontier?
JOHN BRENNAN: This is really --
it needs to
be almost an all-of -- not just
an all-of-government,
but an all-of-nation effort, and
not just
here in the United States, but
other places
as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Does that
necessarily involve
profiling?
JOHN BRENNAN: No, I don't think
it does.
It doesn't mean that any
individual of any
particular faith or background
or ethnicity
is more prone to doing this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.K. vote to
leave the
European Union, the Brexit vote,
you have
said that this won't have any
material effect
on intelligence-gathering
partnership with
the U.K., with Great Britain, or
with Europe.
And yet it certainly is creating
political
turmoil. Are you saying it won't
have any
effect on the ability of the
U.S. and its
allies to work together against
the many threats?
JOHN BRENNAN: Well, it certainly
won't have
any effect or adverse effect on
the U.S.-British
intelligence and security
cooperation and
partnership. That is going to
stay strong.
There will be some complications
associated
with how are they going to move
from being
part of the E.U. to being
outside of the E.U.
as far as border agreements and
other types
of arrangements, whereby they're
going to
try to protect the flow of
people and goods,
because they have been part of
the E.U.
So they are going to have to
establish some
new structures. But as far as
intelligence
cooperation between ourselves
and the United
Kingdom, that is going to remain
exceptionally
strong.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A question about
the report
that was issued yesterday by the
House of
Representatives' special
committee looking
into Benghazi, Libya, attack in
2012.
Among other things, it singled
out what it
called a lack of proper
assessment of the
threat level in Benghazi and at
other U.S.
installations at the time of the
attack. Is
that a fair criticism, and, if
it is, what's
been done since then to make the
situation
better?
JOHN BRENNAN: Oh, I don't
believe it's a fair
criticism.
These situations, these types of
assaults
and attacks against the
compounds frequently
take place in a very dynamic
environment.
And I think it was no secret to
anybody that
the situation in Libya was
rather tenuous.
And so I think that the agency
and the rest
of the intelligence community
had highlighted
that, in terms of the strategic
concerns and
warnings that we had.
It's very difficult to get the
tactical intelligence.
But we always try to take
lessons away from
these types of incidents,
particularly when
there was tragic loss of life on
the part
of U.S. personnel and others
that were there.
So, with each of these
incidents, I think
what we do is to make any type
of adjustments
that we believe are necessary in
terms of
our processes and procedures.
But I'm very
proud of what the agency
officers heroically
did that night in Benghazi, and
it could have
been much worse, except for the
work that
we and others did at that time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mr. Director,
what are your
counterparts in other countries
saying about
the rhetoric of Donald Trump,
the potential
that he may be the president of
the United
States? Do you hear any reaction
from them?
JOHN BRENNAN: Well, without
addressing the
particular comments of any
individual, I do
see a real concern on the part
of my counterparts
about some of the commentary
that is taking
place that is related to the
growth of terrorism
and various proposals in terms
of how to address
it.
So, there is quite a bit of
attention being
paid by our partners, by our
allies, by our
adversaries about what is
happening in the
political circles here.
But my job is to make sure that
they're reassured
that the intelligence
relationship between
the CIA and their services are
going to remain
strong, irrespective of what
happens in a
presidential campaign. It's one
of the most
important things about the
agency is that
we need to continue to soldier
on, irrespective
of what political party or what
candidate
might prevail in an election.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mr. Director,
thank you very
much.
JOHN BRENNAN: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next: a look into
the poor
state of education for the
60,000 children
locked up in juvenile detention
facilities
across the nation.
Hari Sreenivasan takes us inside
one state
that is working to do better.
It's another
in our ongoing series Broken
Justice.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Graduation day
in Lowell,
Massachusetts, with all the
typical fanfare,
balloons, beaming parents and
motivational
speeches.
MAN: All of you are sitting
there trying to
figure out, OK, where is this
going to go?
What am I going to be when I
grow up? I guarantee
you that every single adult in
this room had
the same thought at 17, 18, 19.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yet these kids
aren't like
most graduating from high school
this time
of year. At some point in their
young lives,
each was convicted of a crime
and sentenced
to the care of the Department of
Youth Services,
the state's juvenile corrections
agency, and
though they have since earned
back far more
freedom, they graduate in
custody.
MAN: Getting committed to DYS is
a stressful
time, and I'm proud of all of
you and myself
for sticking to what's
important, getting
an education and bettering
ourselves.
HARI SREENIVASAN: On any given
day across
the country, 36,000 teenagers
and young people
are held in long-term state
custody more than
60 days, and two-thirds of them
are black
and Latino.
In the past 20 years, this
incarcerated population
has dropped by about half, and
many are now
looking at how to improve
education, and thus
outcomes, for juveniles who end
up in this
system.
MICHAEL THOMPSON, Director,
Council of State
Governments Justice Center: When
you look
at this population, they have
been suspended
multiple times, haven't
progressed very far
in the educational system,
dropped out, been
expelled. And we wanted to make
sure that
when these kids are coming back
to the community,
we knew education was key.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Michael
Thompson is executive
director of the Council of State
Governments
Justice Center, a nonprofit
whose recent report
looked at education in juvenile
detention
settings in all 50 states.
MICHAEL THOMPSON: If you asked
anybody on
the street, what's important to
helping turn
this kid's life around, they are
going to
say, well, they need an
education.
So I think everybody assumes
they get a certain
quality of education while
they're incarcerated.
But it turns out this is not an
educational
system that is held accountable
to the same
kind of standards that the
public education
system is.
HARI SREENIVASAN: His group
found large gaps
from state to state in education
available
to juvenile populations, and
that only one-third
of states require incarcerated
kids meet the
same educational standards as
those in public
schools.
LYNNE ALLEN, Judge John J.
Connelly Detention
Facility: We have art class, we
have gym class,
math, history. Everything you
would find in
a regular school, we have here
as well.
HARI SREENIVASAN: One state that
is doing
better is Massachusetts by
matching standards
inside detention with what
students would
receive on the outside, tracking
students'
progress through the system, and
helping kids
return to the community.
LYNNE ALLEN: Welcome to Judge
Connelly.
Lynne Allen runs the Judge John
Connelly detention
facility in Boston, the state's
most restrictive.
One advantage, unlike most
states, Massachusetts
centralizes juvenile education,
rather than
spreading it among state, local
and private
agencies.
I'm assuming some of these young
these kids
are in for pretty serious
crimes.
LYNNE ALLEN: They are.
This facility works with young
men up to manslaughter
charges. So we do have some kids
who have
a pretty good history behind
them. But the
charges that have brought you
here don't have
to define who you are.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In 2015,
17-year-old Josh
was convicted of manslaughter.
He's spent
the past 10 months at Connelly
and has another
eight to go.
Like the other 14 young men
here, he lives
on a secure detention floor, his
movement
constantly monitored. But for
5.5 hours a
day, he and the others are in
school downstairs,
attending academic classes like
English, and
math, vocational courses like
A.V. engineering,
AKA deejaying, or how to build
copper wiring
and ethernet jacks.
Josh recently began psychology
classes online
through Bunker Hill Community
College, credits
he hopes to put towards the
University of
California when he gets out.
JOSH, Resident: I always wanted
to go to California,
and I skateboard, and I always
wanted to go
to college, so I feel like, put
them all together,
that would just be dope.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is the goal of
the state
to make you realize the gravity
of what you
have done?
JOSH: Yes.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is that going
to happen
while you're here and in class,
and taking
an online course?
JOSH: Well, for me, I just have
goals for
myself. And I definitely do feel
bad for what
happened. And I definitely want
to do better
for the people.
I have two younger brothers, so
they look
up to me. I have people that see
a lot in
me, and I don't want to really
let them down,
or myself down, for that matter.
LYNNE ALLEN: They're coming back
to communities.
We want these kids to come out
with the skills
to succeed. And we know they can
succeed,
because they're amazingly
resilient.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Another key
difference is
Massachusetts' support through
education coordinators
and caseworkers, people assigned
to guide
each student into and out of
this system,
making sure education plans,
grades and credits
transfer from and back to
school.
MICHAEL THOMPSON: When a kid who
is incarcerated,
they are going to get out, and
you ask the
question, then, well, how is
that student
going to follow up and enroll in
school once
they are released? And many of
these schools,
for reasons you can probably
imagine, want
nothing to do with the student
when they come
back.
So the question then becomes,
well, who is
going to manage this transition?
Who is going
to do that? Well, it turns out
that in most
states, it is up to the parent
and the kid
to actually manage that
transition.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Education and
career counselor
Kelly McMorrow works with Josh
and about 75
other young men at any given
time.
It seems in some way that there
are these
big systemic forces weighing
down on them
by the time they get here.
Right? They made
a bad decision, clearly, by the
time they
have gotten here. How do you
turn that around
in the limited amount of time
that you have
with them in a place like this?
KELLY MCMORROW, Education and
Career Counselor:
It's challenging, but I think
that's our biggest
goal, is to find what makes them
tick, what
passions they have, and try to
figure -- help
them figure out what path they
want to take,
so that they can go down a
positive road,
so that they're not labeled and
defined by
whatever their charge is.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Finally,
managing the transition
from lockup to a secure facility
like Connelly
and eventually back to the
community often
through halfway houses like this
one is crucial,
says commissioner Peter Forbes.
PETER FORBES, Commission,
Massachusetts Department
of Youth Services: Because, if
we have kids
come in and advance grade levels
and do great
work, and we don't hand that off
to anything
constructive in the community,
it's half-a-loaf.
So we're really trying to
leverage the work
that goes on while they're in
placement with
a positive transition that
translates into
traction in the community.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Back in
Lowell, 20-year-old
John Coady estimates that he
lived in nearly
two dozen different juvenile
facilities around
the state during his
more-than-six-year tenure.
This fall, he's headed to a
four-year college,
where he plans to play football.
JOHN COADY, Resident: Being
locked up, you
lose a lot of life experiences
where you gain
wisdom and stuff.
And if you can get your
education in there,
like, at least you will have
something going
for you. If you don't have
education or work
experience, or anything, I mean,
you're lost.
When you come out, you're going
to have no
friends. You're going -- your
family is probably
not going to care much. You're
not going to
have anything.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And many say
that's a prospect
still far too many young people
across the
nation continue to face.
From Boston, Massachusetts, I'm
Hari Sreenivasan
for the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": why
the head
of Rio 2016 says Olympic worries
are overblown;
plus, a book about tribal
societies and what
they teach us about banding
together.
But, first: NASA is hoping for a
big Fourth
of July this year as it closes
in on the planet
Jupiter for an unprecedented
look. The moment
is arriving after a
five-year-long journey
of more than 1.8 billion miles.
Scientists hope to gain new
understandings
about the largest planet in our
system and
the solar system itself.
That is the focus of our weekly
segment on
the Leading Edge of science.
William Brangham takes it from
there.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The holiday
weekend is often
a time for big blockbuster
movies, and it's
safe to say that concept has not
been lost
on NASA.
The space agency has just
released a kind
of movie trailer about what it
hopes will
be a nail-biting night on the
Fourth of July.
That's when the Juno spacecraft,
which is
going to fly closer to Jupiter
than any spacecraft
has before, is supposed to reach
its destination.
But getting to Jupiter comes
with its own
risks.
This is how NASA describes it in
the trailer.
MAN: It's a monster. It's
unforgiving. It's
relentless. It's spinning around
so fast its
gravity is like a giant
slingshot, slinging
rocks, dust, electrons, whole
comets. Anything
that gets close to it becomes
its weapon.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: OK, that got
my attention.
Our science correspondent Miles
O'Brien is
here to spell out some more.
MILES O'BRIEN: William, I should
have brought
the popcorn.
(LAUGHTER)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Exactly.
We have been to Jupiter before.
NASA's been
there a couple of times. What's
different
this time?
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, depending
on how you
count, we have had about 10
missions to Jupiter.
Most of them have been flybys,
Voyager, Pioneer
notable among them, New Horizons
as well.
We of course had the orbiting
mission of Galileo,
which began in the mid-'90s into
the early
2000s, which did most science
around Jupiter
and its moons.
And that's the big treasure
trove of data.
And all the while, the Hubble
telescope has
captured a lot of interesting
data from Jupiter.
And in particular, back in 1994,
you may recall
when the Shoemaker-Levy 9 comet,
that fragment
comet, struck Jupiter, Hubble
got some amazing
images of those impacts.
But all off this is skin-deep.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So what are we
trying to
learn this time?
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, there's a
lot of things
we can learn from Jupiter.
Jupiter, of course, is the
biggest plant in
our solar system of eight
planets. It's about
two-and-a-half times the mass of
all the rest
of the solar system combined, of
the planets,
that is. And it's really like a
big deep freeze
for how our solar system began
four billion
years ago.
It really hasn't changed very
much. So scientists
want to understand what's kind
of beneath
the surface there, how much
hydrogen, how
much water, what about the
magnetic field,
what about the gravitational
pull, is there
a solid core? All these are
important clues
and information for us to
understand how our
solar system progressed, how it
developed
and really how we came to be
where we are
today.
The principal investigator of
the mission
is Scott Bolton, and he fills us
in on some
of the big questions.
SCOTT BOLTON, NASA: The major
science objectives
of Juno are, one, to understand
how Jupiter
formed and what is it made out
of. We want
the recipe of solar systems, and
we are at
the ingredient list level.
So we're gathering the
ingredient list and
understanding how Jupiter is
structured. So
the most important objectives
are understanding
Jupiter's formation and how that
relates to
the formation of other planets,
including
us
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, if Juno
isn't landing
on Jupiter, how is it going to
see beneath
the surface?
MILES O'BRIEN: It's not so easy,
is it? You're
talking about, first of all, a
very hazardous
place to do business, if you
will.
But the key is, they to
understand things
about, for example, the magnetic
fields. They're
using things like magnetometers.
They're using
microwave detection capability
which will
be able to see beneath the
clouds and sort
of identify the composition of
what lies beneath
the clouds, spectrometers, a
device which
actually measure the
gravitational pull from
the planet itself on the
spacecraft, and will
be able to give scientists on
the ground exactly
how strong it is at any given
point.
Now, you can imagine, this is
the closest
orbit ever to Jupiter. This will
be a 14-day
orbit once it gets into its
science mode,
and building devices that are
able to gather
things on things like radiation,
which are
important, but which, of course,
are very
hazardous to the spacecraft
itself, is difficult.
So they built a titanium box
with has just
enough shielding to protect the
instruments
and yet allow the data to come
in. One of
the main people on the team is
the deputy
chief engineer, Tracy Drain.
TRACY DRAIN, NASA: If you want
to pick, aside
from the sun, the scariest
environments we
know of to send a spacecraft to,
Jupiter would
be the place to go, because
Jupiter has this
gigantic magnetic field, which
traps a lot
of charged particles that get
accelerated
along the magnetic field lines.
It builds up this huge radiation
field. If
we were to leave our spacecraft
bathing in
that radiation, it's just not
designed to
deal with that. So we are going
to go through
the radiation belts to get into
orbit and
then we will going in and out of
the radiation
belts as we do our science
phase.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, Monday is
the big day.
What are we actually going to
see? What's
going to happen Monday?
MILES O'BRIEN: It's the
denouement to a story
which began five years ago with
a launch.
It launched in August of 2011,
on its way,
traveling more than a billion
miles in space,
making its way toward Jupiter,
unfurling these
giant solar arrays, the biggest
arrays to
ever to go on a deep space
probe. There's
only 4 percent of the sun's
power at Jupiter
relative to what we have here.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It's that dim
out there?
MILES O'BRIEN: It's that dim
that they had
to build these giant arrays.
Those have been
spread and they're operating
just fine.
And it's traveling now, as it
speeds up toward
Jupiter, being captured by the
gravity, at
more than 153,000 miles an hour,
making it
one of the fastest manmade
objects ever. So,
the trick will be reducing that
speed enough
so that it doesn't just whiz by
the planet,
like some of those other probes
we talked
about.
So, it will turn its rocket in
the opposite
direction, sort of the reverse
direction,
fire it for about 35 minutes.
And that should
slow it down just enough for
Jupiter to pull
it into its grasp. And that will
be a nail-biting
moment for the folks at the Jet
Propulsion
Lab in Pasadena, California, as
they wait
to hear, subsequent to all that
happening
-- this is all on autopilot.
There's nothing they can do to
make this happen
or not happen. It will either
happen or it
won't. It's kind of the die is
cast. They
will get, like, a three-second
beep, and that
will be it. And that will be the
best beep
these guys have ever heard,
hopefully.
And then the mission begins. The
scientific
mission ultimately will begin
toward the fall
with 14-day orbits lasting for
about 16 months.
And then, when they're done with
Juno, Juno
will dive right into Jupiter and
have a fiery
conclusion.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Are we going
to see images
coming back from Juno?
MILES O'BRIEN: It's not an
imagery mission
for the scientists, per se. All
the data they
want is more on the squiggly
lines, if you
will.
However, there is a camera on
board. It's
designed primarily for public
affairs. And
the imagery should be
interesting for us,
because the orbit of Juno is
polar. And we
really haven't had a good look
at the poles
of Jupiter. And in particular,
one of the
scientific goals here is to
understand their
amazing auroras, which are much
stronger than
we have here on Earth.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right, we
will be watching
on the Fourth of July.
Miles O'Brien, thank you so
much.
MILES O'BRIEN: You're welcome,
William.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Summer
Olympics are less
than six weeks away. And even
for the usual
drama and tension that often
precedes the
Games, the road to Rio has been
especially
rocky.
John Yang has that story.
JOHN YANG: For most Olympic host
cities, the
usual concern is whether all the
venues will
be ready on time. But Rio
presents other worries,
like security and crime.
Earlier today, parts of a body
washed up on
Copacabana Beach. There's the
Zika virus outbreak
and whether it poses risks to
athletes and
visitors, and the state of a
heavily polluted
bay where some of the
competition will take
place.
Earlier this week, I sat down
with Sidney
Levy, the CEO of Rio's Olympic
Organizing
Committee.
Sidney Levy, welcome.
When the Olympics were awarded
in 2009, things
were very different in Brazil
and in Rio.
What assurances can you give the
athletes,
the spectators, the broadcasters
around the
world who are going to be
watching this that
things will be ready to go in
less than six
weeks?
SIDNEY LEVY, CEO, Rio 2016
Olympic Organizing
Committee: Well, we are ready.
Why are we ready? Because we
have been working
hard for seven years. We have
thousands of
people working. We spent a lot
of money. And
we put all the resources, all
the creativity
we have to deliver great Games,
and that's
a commitment for the people to
do that and
for the country. We are doing
this for the
people of our country.
JOHN YANG: You say you're ready,
you have
been working hard, but there are
a lot of
challenges that are still there,
for instance,
the Zika virus.
You have got just recently Rory
McIlroy, one
of the world's top golfers,
saying he's not
going to go. You have got other
athletes who
are expressing concern about
going for various
reasons. What assurances can you
give them
that it's not going to be a
problem?
SIDNEY LEVY: Well, the World
Health Organization
issued a study stating very
clearly that the
Zika virus is not a threat
during the winter
months.
Brazil just entered the winter
now. So, the
mosquitoes, they die during the
winter. It's
a proved thing. So we now have
-- for example,
I have 4,000 people working for
me in the
streets of Rio, in the beaches,
in the parks,
in T-shirts, not a single case
of virus, of
Zika today.
JOHN YANG: But how do you -- the
concern is
still there. You say it's not
the mosquito
season. You say it's the winter.
But the concern
is still there.
SIDNEY LEVY: Well, but I have a
friend of
mine who went to Rio the other
day in long
sleeves with the hat, put the
spray on, and
went down to the beach. And
there is thousands
of people in the beach naked, as
Brazilians
go to the beach naked.
Not a single worry. So we're not
feeling that.
We're seeing that the rest of
the world is
much more vocal about that. But
we, who are
living there, we're not being
threatened by
the Zika. And so we think this
is a little
bit out of proportion. And it's
one athlete.
And we have 11,000 athletes
confirmed for
Rio.
JOHN YANG: Huge questions about
who's actually
going to be in the Games,
whether Russia will
have a track and field team or
not. What cloud
does that put over the Olympics?
SIDNEY LEVY: The commitment is
for clean Games.
We need to deliver clean Games.
We have to have zero tolerance
for doping.
So Brazil built a lab, a
brand-new lab, and
we brought people in. People
were tested.
Didn't work well, the first
test. We are,
in fact, today, bringing
international experts
to supervisor our work. So we
are pretty committed
to deliver clean Games, and
that's what we're
going to do.
JOHN YANG: But that lab has been
suspended
by the Anti-Doping Agency.
SIDNEY LEVY: Because the people
we brought
in didn't pass the first test.
So we're bringing
in international supervision
right now.
JOHN YANG: Talk about clean
Games, concern
about clean water in the bay,
where the sailing
events are going to be, I think
some rowing
events are going to be.
The government said it was going
to clean
it up. We just had a reporting
team down there
looking at it. It's still -- in
the pictures
that we have brought back, still
raw sewage
still being dumped into that
bay. I think
one health expert said that
three teaspoons
of water, exposure to three
teaspoons of water,
99 percent risk of infection, of
illness.
How can you reassure the
competitors who are
going to be in that water that
they're going
to be safe?
SIDNEY LEVY: We run test events.
We ran in
2014, 2015, where we exposed 350
athletes
to the same bay. So we ran
those. Nobody got
sick.
We have five competition areas
around the
bay. We are tracking them every
day. Four
are clean. We -- some days yes,
some days
no. If that doesn't work, closer
to the Games,
we are going to change the area
where the
competition goes.
The further away you go, the
cleaner they
are. So that's what they are
going to do to
assure a clean competition.
JOHN YANG: So you may have to
move some events
to other parts of the bay in
order to get
-- in order to hit clean water?
SIDNEY LEVY: Yes. Absolutely, we
have to move.
JOHN YANG: We have less than a
minute left.
What's keeping you up at night?
(LAUGHTER)
SIDNEY LEVY: Very tough job.
It's a very tough
job.
It's the combination of all
that. I'm sure
certain things won't go right,
but they need
to be small. So how to keep
everybody working
together -- there's 300,000
people working
together to deliver the Games,
between contractors
and -- so how to operate that in
a seamless
fashion, in peace, and it's a
very tough job.
JOHN YANG: But no single issue
is -- no big
issue?
SIDNEY LEVY: No, I don't have a
single issue.
And I'm pretty confident,
because I think
this is a unique opportunity.
The Olympic
Games is a wonderful thing. It's
a peace movement.
It's where Israelis and
Palestinians have
breakfast at the same table, so
it's a very
good thing.
Rio is a wonderful city. The
people are very
warm. The nature is wonderful.
These two things
together, it's once in a
lifetime. It won't
be repeated so soon. So, I hope
people come
and enjoy.
JOHN YANG: We will see in six
weeks how it
all goes.
SIDNEY LEVY: Thank you.
JOHN YANG: Sidney Levy, thanks
for being with
us.
SIDNEY LEVY: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
we add another
book to our summer reading list.
It's a modern take on what we
can learn from
tribal societies when it comes
to loyalty,
belonging and the quest for
meaning.
At the recent BookExpo America
in Chicago,
Jeffrey Brown talked to
journalist and author
Sebastian Junger. His new book
is "Tribe:
On Homecoming and Belonging."
JEFFREY BROWN: Start with the
definition.
What do you mean by tribe?
SEBASTIAN JUNGER, Author,
"Tribe: On Homecoming
and Belonging": The real an
ancient meaning
of tribe is the community that
you live in
that you share resources with
that you would
risk your life to defend.
I mean, that's the real meaning
of tribe.
Of course, in modern society,
that structure,
that tribal structure has been
lost. That
loss of tribe also costs people
psychologically.
JEFFREY BROWN: Did this grow
specifically
out of your work as a war
reporter or...
SEBASTIAN JUNGER: Well, there
was this puzzling
thing that I noticed.
A lot of the soldiers that I was
with -- and
I was at a remote outpost called
Restrepo.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
SEBASTIAN JUNGER: It was a
20-man position,
everyone sleeping basically
shoulder to shoulder
in the dirt at first and then in
these little
hooches.
And it was very intimate, very
close, very
connected, emotionally connected
experience.
And after the deployment, which
was -- the
deployment was hellish. And
afterward the
deployment, a lot of those guys
missed the
combat and they didn't want to
come home to
America.
What is it about modern society
that's so
repellent even to people that
are from there?
And my book "Tribe" is an
attempt to answer
that question.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, tribe can be
any kind of
community? Does it have to be a
certain size?
Does it have to be -- how
organized does it
have to be?
SEBASTIAN JUNGER: Well, humans
lose the ability
to connect emotionally with
people after a
certain number, right at 150.
So there is a limit to the
number of people
we can connect with and that we
can feel capable
of sacrificing ourselves for if
need be.
JEFFREY BROWN: What happens,
though, when
you're a member of a larger
corporation, a
larger town, a larger -- a
religious group?
SEBASTIAN JUNGER: I think the
reason those
things feel good is because they
come close
enough to replicating the
connections of tribe
that it's sort of familiar in
human terms.
They're not tribes. Tribes,
really, you have
to live with the people in your
tribe for
it to be a tribe in the sort of
ancient sense.
Now, what happens when society
experiences
a collapse, like the Blitz in
London or an
earthquake or something like
that, is that
people are forced into communal
situations
with each other in order to
survive.
JEFFREY BROWN: So you're looking
at our society
and seeing an affluence and
seeing -- but
seeing a kind of a
disconnection?
SEBASTIAN JUNGER: Well, the
irony of modern
society, for all of its very
real benefits
-- I mean, modern society is a
miracle in
a lot of ways, right? But as
affluence goes
up in a society, the suicide
rate tends to
go up, not down.
As affluence goes up in a
society, the depression
rate goes up. When a crisis
hits, then people's
psychological health starts to
improve. After
9/11 in New York City -- I live
in New York
-- and after 9/11, the suicide
rate went down
in New York, not up. It went
down. It improved.
Violent crime went down. Murder
went down.
There was a sense of everyone
needs each other.
And once you're called to serve
your community,
in some way, you sort of forget
your own problems.
JEFFREY BROWN: What's your sense
of how technology
changes -- the Internet? Much
discussion about
the communities that can form,
small communities
that can form on the Internet.
In some ways,
we lose a sense of a larger
community, but
we have these niche communities.
SEBASTIAN JUNGER: I don't talk
about the Internet
in my book.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
SEBASTIAN JUNGER: But they are
communities
only in the most abstract and
unhuman sense.
JEFFREY BROWN: So that's not
enough?
SEBASTIAN JUNGER: It's not
enough.
And, actually, I would say the
Internet is
doubly dangerous for all -- and,
again, for
all of its miraculous capacity,
not only does
it not provide real community
and real human
connection. It gives you the
illusion that
it does, right?
So, oh, I have got lots of
friends on Facebook,
so I'm good. You're actually not
good. And
I'm not an expert in this, but
from what I
studied for my book "Tribe,"
what you need
is to feel people, smell them,
hear them,
feel them around you.
I mean, that's the human
connection that we
evolved for, for hundreds of
thousands of
years. The Internet doesn't
provide that.
JEFFREY BROWN: We talk about
things having
broken down in Washington.
SEBASTIAN JUNGER: Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: And we're
watching a political
campaign. Right?
SEBASTIAN JUNGER: Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: Very much us
against them.
SEBASTIAN JUNGER: Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: Does the notion
of tribes allow
us to have a cohesion that we
also think we
need as a country?
SEBASTIAN JUNGER: Yes, it's a
great question.
I think what you're seeing in
this political
season are political camps
deciding that they
are their own tribe and it's us
against them.
And I think the trick -- and
this country
is in a very, very tricky place
socially,
economically, politically -- I
think the trick,
if you want to be a functioning
country, a
nation, a viable nation, you
have to define
tribe to include the entire
country, even
people you disagree with.
Disagreement is great, debate is
great, conflict
is great. It's how we all get
better.
JEFFREY BROWN: Right.
SEBASTIAN JUNGER: What you can't
do is have
contempt for your fellow
citizens. That is
destructive.
No soldier in a trench in a
platoon in combat
would have contempt for their
trench mate.
They might not like them. They
disagree with
them, but you don't have
contempt for someone
that your life depends on. And
that's what
we're falling into in the
political dialogue
in this country. And in my
opinion, that is
more dangerous to this country
than ISIS is,
I mean literally like more of a
threat to
our nation.
JEFFREY BROWN: But as the tribe
increases,
the hard -- cohesion gets
harder, right?
SEBASTIAN JUNGER: Absolutely.
I mean, no one is saying this is
going to
be easy, but you do have -- to
understand
the task, you have to understand
your origins.
You have to understand why
humans are the
way we are and what the cost of
modern society
has been.
Once you understand -- and
that's what my
book tries to explain. Once you
understand
that, it's going to be much
easier to devise,
to jerry-rig a new solution to a
new problem.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, did all this
make you think
which tribes you belong to or
your own tribe?
SEBASTIAN JUNGER: I mean, sadly,
I grew up
in the -- in the loneliest place
in the world,
an American suburb.
Like, I wish I had a tribe. We
don't. We just
don't. That's the problem.
That's why our
depression rate, our suicide
rate, all that
stuff is through the roof.
That's the tragedy
of modern society.
JEFFREY BROWN: Short of a Blitz
or short of
a 9/11...
SEBASTIAN JUNGER: Right, the
apocalypse, right.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes, what do
people do in their
daily life to find that?
SEBASTIAN JUNGER: Well, I think
if you try
to -- if you imagine your life
in terms of
the community you live in, and
you try to
connect personally to the people
in your community,
even though you drive 40 miles
away to go
to work, I think that's
enormously beneficial
and therapeutic.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, the
book is "Tribe:
On Homecoming and Belonging."
Sebastian Junger, thank you very
much.
SEBASTIAN JUNGER: Thank you very
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can watch
many more
of Jeff's interviews from
BookExpo America
and other book festivals. You
will find all
those at the Web site,
PBS.org/book-view-now.
Also online, a renaissance in
American cities
has helped move the American
dream from suburbia,
which we just heard about, to
the urban center.
That's said by one of our Making
Sense columnists.
Take a closer look at what's
driving the boom.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And tune in later tonight on
"Charlie Rose":
Ian Bremmer of Eurasia Group on
how the Brexit
vote is already affecting global
alliances
and relationships.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Thursday, I discuss the
global refugee
crisis with the U.S. ambassador
to the United
Nations, Samantha Power.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening. For all of us at the
"PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.